h2. OGC API - EDR Part 3 Service Profile Generator

h3. Overview

The goal was to produce authoritative tooling for creating OGC API - Environmental Data Retrieval (EDR) Part 3 Service Profiles. The original implementation was custom code — interactive prompts, f-string templates, and raw dicts — with no schema enforcement. Feedback indicated the approach needed to be grounded in a recognized data model so that the profile definition itself could be treated as authoritative.

The new implementation is built on two foundations:

* *Pydantic v2* — the profile schema is defined as Pydantic models. Instantiating a @ServiceProfile@ validates the entire structure before any files are written. Invalid query types, missing required fields, or abstract tests referencing non-existent requirements all raise validation errors with field-level messages.
* *edr-pydantic* (https://github.com/KNMI/edr-pydantic) — a KNMI-maintained library providing Pydantic models for OGC API - EDR response objects (@Collection@, @DataQueries@, @Extent@, @Parameter@, etc.). Rather than maintaining our own EDR data model types, we use theirs directly. This means a profile config is simultaneously a valid EDR collection descriptor and a Part 3 profile definition.

h3. Implementation

Repository: https://github.com/ShaneMill1/OGC-Service-Profile-Creation

The implementation is three files:

|_.File|_.Role|
|@src/models.py@|Authoritative Pydantic schema. @ServiceProfile@ composes @edr_pydantic.collections.Collection@ for collections, plus profile-specific models: @Requirement@, @AbstractTest@, @PubSubConfig@, @SubscriptionFilter@. Cross-model validators enforce referential integrity (e.g. every abstract test must reference a valid requirement id). OGC URIs are derived properties — they cannot be set incorrectly.|
|@src/generate.py@|Serialization only. Takes a validated @ServiceProfile@ and writes OpenAPI 3.0, AsyncAPI 3.0, Metanorma/AsciiDoc requirements class, conformance class, individual requirement files, individual abstract test files, and a round-trip @profile_config.json@. Active query types are derived directly from the @edr-pydantic@ @DataQueries@ model fields.|
|@src/cli.py@|Minimal CLI. Loads a YAML or JSON config, validates it via @ServiceProfile.model_validate()@, and calls @generate()@. Validation errors surface before anything touches the filesystem.|

The tool is also importable as a library:

<pre>
from models import ServiceProfile
from generate import generate
from pathlib import Path

profile = ServiceProfile.model_validate(config_dict)
generate(profile, Path("./output"))
</pre>

h3. Demo

Using the included @examples/water_gauge.yaml@ config:

<pre>
python src/cli.py --config examples/water_gauge.yaml --output ./water_gauge_profile
</pre>

Output:

<pre>
water_gauge_profile/
├── openapi.yaml
├── asyncapi.yaml
├── profile_config.json
├── requirements/
│   ├── requirements_class_core.adoc
│   └── core/
│       ├── REQ_openapi.adoc
│       ├── REQ_collection-water-gauge.adoc
│       ├── REQ_data-query-items-water-gauge.adoc
│       ├── REQ_data-query-locations-water-gauge.adoc
│       └── REQ_output-format-water-gauge.adoc
└── abstract_tests/
    ├── ATS_class_core.adoc
    └── core/
        ├── ATS_openapi.adoc
        ├── ATS_collection-water-gauge.adoc
        ├── ATS_data-query-items-water-gauge.adoc
        ├── ATS_data-query-locations-water-gauge.adoc
        └── ATS_output-format-water-gauge.adoc
</pre>

*openapi.yaml* (paths derived from @edr-pydantic@ @DataQueries@ fields):

<pre>
openapi: 3.0.3
info:
  title: Water Gauge Observations Profile API
  version: '1.0'
  description: 'OGC API - EDR Part 3 Service Profile: Water Gauge Observations Profile'
  x-ogc-profile: http://www.opengis.net/spec/ogcapi-edr-3/1.0/req/water_gauge
paths:
  /collections/water_gauge:
    get:
      summary: Get water_gauge collection metadata
  /collections/water_gauge/items:
    get:
      summary: Query water_gauge items
      parameters: [bbox, datetime]
  /collections/water_gauge/items/{featureId}:
    get:
      summary: Get water_gauge item by ID
  /collections/water_gauge/locations:
    get:
      summary: List available locations for water_gauge
  /collections/water_gauge/locations/{locationId}:
    get:
      summary: Query water_gauge by location
      parameters: [locationId, datetime]
  /collections/water_gauge/position:
    get:
      summary: Query water_gauge by position
      parameters: [coords (required), datetime]
</pre>

*requirements/requirements_class_core.adoc*:

<pre>
[[req_class_water_gauge]]
[requirements_class]
====
[%metadata]
identifier:: http://www.opengis.net/spec/ogcapi-edr-3/1.0/req/water_gauge
target-type:: Water Gauge Observations Profile Standard
requirement:: /req/water_gauge/openapi
requirement:: /req/water_gauge/collection-water-gauge
requirement:: /req/water_gauge/data-query-items-water-gauge
requirement:: /req/water_gauge/data-query-locations-water-gauge
requirement:: /req/water_gauge/output-format-water-gauge
====
</pre>

*abstract_tests/ATS_class_core.adoc*:

<pre>
[[ats_class_water_gauge]]
[conformance_class]
====
[%metadata]
identifier:: http://www.opengis.net/spec/ogcapi-edr-3/1.0/conf/water_gauge
target:: http://www.opengis.net/spec/ogcapi-edr-3/1.0/req/water_gauge
abstract-test:: /conf/water_gauge/openapi
abstract-test:: /conf/water_gauge/collection-water-gauge
abstract-test:: /conf/water_gauge/data-query-items-water-gauge
abstract-test:: /conf/water_gauge/data-query-locations-water-gauge
abstract-test:: /conf/water_gauge/output-format-water-gauge
====
</pre>

*asyncapi.yaml* (generated when @pubsub@ is configured):

<pre>
asyncapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Water Gauge Observations Profile AsyncAPI
  version: '1.0'
servers:
  production:
    host: localhost:5672
    protocol: amqp
channels:
  water_gauge_notifications:
    address: collections/water_gauge/items/#
    x-ogc-subscription:
      filters:
        - name: state
          schema: {type: string}
        - name: threshold_ft
          schema: {type: number}
</pre>

h3. Validation example

Attempting to reference a non-existent requirement from an abstract test:

<pre>
profile = ServiceProfile.model_validate({
  "name": "test",
  "title": "Test",
  "collections": [...],
  "requirements": [{"id": "openapi", "statement": "...", "parts": ["..."]}],
  "abstract_tests": [{"id": "missing", "requirement_id": "missing", "steps": ["..."]}]
})
# => ValidationError: AbstractTest 'missing' references unknown requirement 'missing'
</pre>
